Cartilaginous fish produce a small number of large, yolky eggs. The dermis is covered with overlapping scales. Bony fish have a swim bladder which helps them maintain a constant depth in the water column, but not a cloaca. === Amphibian anatomy ===

Amphibians are a class of animals comprising frogs, salamanders and caecilians. Their main bones are hollow and lightweight and are fully ossified and the vertebrae interlock with each other and have articular processes. Their ribs are usually short and may be fused to the vertebrae. Their skin contains little keratin and lacks scales, but contains many mucous glands and in some species, poison glands. The hearts of amphibians have three chambers, two atria and one ventricle. Amphibians breathe by means of buccal pumping, a pump action in which air is first drawn into the buccopharyngeal region through the nostrils. These are then closed and the air is forced into the lungs by contraction of the throat. The feet have four or five digits and the toes are often webbed for swimming or have suction pads for climbing. Frogs have large eyes and no tail. Caecilians superficially resemble earthworms and are limbless. They burrow by means of zones of muscle contractions which move along the body and they swim by undulating their body from side to side. They are tetrapods, but the snakes and a few species of lizard either have no limbs or their limbs are much reduced in size. Their bones are better ossified and their skeletons stronger than those of amphibians. The teeth are conical and mostly uniform in size. The surface cells of the epidermis are modified into horny scales which create a waterproof layer. The heart resembles that of the amphibian but there is a septum which more completely separates the oxygenated and deoxygenated bloodstreams. The reproductive system has evolved for internal fertilization, with a copulatory organ present in most species. The bladder is small as nitrogenous waste is excreted as uric acid.Turtles are notable for their protective shells. They have an inflexible trunk encased in a horny carapace above and a plastron below. The neck is long and flexible and the head and the legs can be drawn back inside the shell. In aquatic species, the front legs are modified into flippers.Tuataras superficially resemble lizards but the lineages diverged in the Triassic period. There is one living species, Sphenodon punctatus. The skull has two openings (fenestrae) on either side and the jaw is rigidly attached to the skull. The teeth are merely projections of bony material from the jaw and eventually wear down. The brain and heart are more primitive than those of other reptiles, and the lungs have a single chamber and lack bronchi. This results in the jaws being less rigidly attached which allows the mouth to open wider. Lizards are mostly quadrupeds, with the trunk held off the ground by short, sideways-facing legs, but a few species have no limbs and resemble snakes. The skeleton consists of a skull, a hyoid bone, spine and ribs though a few species retain a vestige of the pelvis and rear limbs in the form of pelvic spurs. Snakes lack moveable eyelids, the eyes being covered by transparent "spectacle" scales. The head and trunk are dorso-ventrally flattened and the tail is laterally compressed. It undulates from side to side to force the animal through the water when swimming. The tough keratinized scales provide body armour and some are fused to the skull. Valves seal the nostrils and ears when it is submerged. === Bird anatomy ===

Birds are tetrapods but though their hind limbs are used for walking or hopping, their front limbs are wings covered with feathers and adapted for flight. The long bones are thin, hollow and very light. Air sac extensions from the lungs occupy the centre of some bones. There are no teeth and the narrow jaws are adapted into a horn-covered beak. They face forwards in predators and sideways in ducks.The feathers are outgrowths of the epidermis and are found in localized bands from where they fan out over the skin. The only cutaneous gland is the single uropygial gland near the base of the tail. There are scales on the legs, feet and claws on the tips of the toes. They mostly have four limbs, but some aquatic mammals have no limbs or limbs modified into fins, and the forelimbs of bats are modified into wings. The bones of mammals are well ossified and their teeth, which are usually differentiated, are coated in a layer of prismatic enamel. Mammals have three bones in the middle ear and a cochlea in the inner ear. They are clothed in hair and their skin contains glands which secrete sweat. The mammalian heart has four chambers, and oxygenated and deoxygenated blood are kept entirely separate. Exceptions to this are the egg-laying monotremes, the platypus and the echidnas of Australia. ==== Human anatomy ====

Humans have the overall body plan of a mammal. Human anatomy can be taught regionally or systemically; that is, respectively, studying anatomy by bodily regions such as the head and chest, or studying by specific systems, such as the nervous or respiratory systems. The major anatomy textbook, Gray's Anatomy, has been reorganized from a systems format to a regional format, in line with modern teaching methods. They are often involved in teaching anatomy, and research into certain systems, organs, tissues or cells. They constitute about 95% of the animal species. By definition, none of these creatures has a backbone. Locomotion is often provided by cilia or flagella or may proceed via the advance of pseudopodia, food may be gathered by phagocytosis, energy needs may be supplied by photosynthesis and the cell may be supported by an endoskeleton or an exoskeleton. Some protozoans can form multicellular colonies.Metazoans are a multicellular organism, with different groups of cells serving different functions. An endoskeleton derived from the mesoderm is present in echinoderms, sponges and some cephalopods. Exoskeletons are derived from the epidermis and is composed of chitin in arthropods (insects, spiders, ticks, shrimps, crabs, lobsters). The outer epithelial layer may include cells of several types including sensory cells, gland cells and stinging cells. === Arthropod anatomy ===

Arthropods comprise the largest phylum in the animal kingdom with over a million known invertebrate species.Insects possess segmented bodies supported by a hard-jointed outer covering, the exoskeleton, made mostly of chitin. The thorax has three pairs of segmented legs, one pair each for the three segments that compose the thorax and one or two pairs of wings. Spiders have no wings and no antennae. They have mouthparts called chelicerae which are often connected to venom glands as most spiders are venomous. They have a second pair of appendages called pedipalps attached to the cephalothorax. These have similar segmentation to the legs and function as taste and smell organs. It enables physicians or veterinary surgeons to gauge the position and anatomy of the associated deeper structures. Comparative anatomy relates to the comparison of anatomical structures (both gross and microscopic) in different animals. Over time, this medical practice expanded by a continually developing understanding of the functions of organs and structures in the body. The Hellenistic Egyptian city of Alexandria was the stepping-stone for Greek anatomy and physiology. Great patronage of the arts and sciences from the Ptolemaic dynasty of Egypt helped raise Alexandria up, further rivalling the cultural and scientific achievements of other Greek states. Some of the most striking advances in early anatomy and physiology took place in Hellenistic Alexandria. Herophilus became known for his anatomical works making impressing contributions to many branches of anatomy and many other aspects of medicine. Herophilus's knowledge of the human body has provided vital input towards understanding the brain, eye, liver, reproductive organs and nervous system, and characterizing the course of disease. He was able to distinguish the sensory and the motor nerves in the human body and believed that air entered the lungs and heart, which was then carried throughout the body. Erasistratus was also responsible for naming and describing the function of the epiglottis and the valves of the heart, including the tricuspid. It was Herophilus who made the point that damage to motor nerves induced paralysis. Great feats were made during the third century BCE in both the digestive and reproductive systems. He showed that the uterus is a hollow organ and described the ovaries and uterine tubes. Aristotle described vertebrate anatomy based on animal dissection. Praxagoras identified the difference between arteries and veins. He compiled existing knowledge and studied anatomy through dissection of animals. He was one of the first experimental physiologists through his vivisection experiments on animals. Galen's drawings, based mostly on dog anatomy, became effectively the only anatomical textbook for the next thousand years. === Medieval to early modern ===
Anatomy developed little from classical times until the sixteenth century; as the historian Marie Boas writes, "Progress in anatomy before the sixteenth century is as mysteriously slow as its development after 1500 is startlingly rapid". : 120–121  Between 1275 and 1326, the anatomists Mondino de Luzzi, Alessandro Achillini and Antonio Benivieni at Bologna carried out the first systematic human dissections since ancient times. It describes the body in the order followed in Mondino's dissections, starting with the abdomen, then the thorax, then the head and limbs. Originally from Brabant, Vesalius published the influential book De humani corporis fabrica ("the structure of the human body"), a large format book in seven volumes, in 1543. === Late modern ===

In the United States, medical schools began to be set up towards the end of the 18th century. A similar problem existed in Britain where demand for bodies became so great that grave-raiding and even anatomy murder were practised to obtain cadavers. Some graveyards were in consequence protected with watchtowers. He was responsible for setting up the system of three years of "pre-clinical" academic teaching in the sciences underlying medicine, including especially anatomy. From 1822 the Royal College of Surgeons regulated the teaching of anatomy in medical schools. Medical museums provided examples in comparative anatomy, and were often used in teaching. Ignaz Semmelweis investigated puerperal fever and he discovered how it was caused. The students went from the dissecting room to the hospital ward and examined women in childbirth. Before the modern medical era, the main means for studying the internal structures of the body were dissection of the dead and inspection, palpation and auscultation of the living. Study of small structures involved passing light through them and the microtome was invented to provide sufficiently thin slices of tissue to examine. The invention of the electron microscope brought a great advance in resolution power and allowed research into the ultrastructure of cells and the organelles and other structures within them.


RESPONSE:
Hello! I'm here to assist you with any questions or concerns you might have. What topic would you like to discuss or inquire about? Please feel free to ask me anything.